docs/developers/documentation/index.md, before:

(docs_contributing_guide)=
# Contributing Documentation

This guide will teach you how to submit new documents to napari's usage documentation.

## Prerequisites

- Familiarity with `git`
- A [GitHub](https://github.com) account
- A clean conda environment with napari docs dependencies installed
    - You can install these with `pip install "napari[docs]"`
    - These dependencies will allow you to preview your document locally, as it would appear on `napari.org`
    - They will also install `jupytext`, which you will need to contribute documents containing code or viewer interactions

## 0. Before you start

If you'd like to contribute a brand new document to our usage section, it might be worth [opening an issue](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/new?assignees=&labels=documentation&template=documentation.md&title=)
 on our repository first to discuss the content you'd like to see and get some early feedback from the community.
The napari team can also suggest what type of document would be best suited, and whether there are already
existing documents that could be expanded to include the content you think is lacking.

Examples of documents you might want to contribute are:

- **Explanations** (in `napari/docs/guides`): in depth content about napari architecture, development choices and some complex features
- **Tutorials** (in `napari/docs/tutorials`): detailed, reproducible step by step guides, usually combining multiple napari features to complete a potentially complex task
- **How-tos** (in `napari/docs/howtos/`): simple step by step guides demonstrating the use of common features
- **Getting started** (in `napari/docs/tutorials/fundamentals`): these documents are a mix of tutorials and how-tos covering the fundamentals of installing and working with napari for beginners

```{admonition} Got materials for a workshop?
:class: tip

If you already have teaching materials e.g. recordings, slide decks or jupyter notebooks
hosted somewhere, you can add links to these on our [napari workshops](../../further-resources/napari-workshops.md) page.
```

If you are amending an existing document, make your changes and skip straight
to [Step #4 - Preview your document](#4-preview-your-document).
If you are writing a document whose content is mostly text,
you can write a plain markdown document and skip straight to [Step #3 - Update TOC](#3-update-toc).
If you are writing a how-to guide or tutorial that requires executing code or working with the napari viewer, follow
the steps below to prepare your document.

### Prerequisites for contributing documentation with code

- [Jupyter notebook](https://jupyter.org/) installed
- Familiarity with Jupyter notebooks (code cells and markdown cells)
- Familiarity with using napari through a Jupyter notebook

## 1. Download our template

Our goal is that all tutorials and how-tos are easily downloadable and executable by our users.
This helps ensure that they are reproducible and makes them easier to maintain.
We therefore provide a notebook template for our documents.

[Jupyter notebooks](https://jupyter.org/) are a great option for our documents, because they allow you to easily combine code and well formatted text in markdown.
However, their [raw JSON format](https://numpy.org/numpy-tutorials/content/pairing.html#background) is not great for version control, so we use [MyST Markdown](https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) documents in our repository and on napari.org.

Fork and clone [our repository](https://github.com/napari/napari), and make a copy of `napari/docs/developers/documentation/docs_template.md`.
You can edit the template directly in Jupyter notebook, or in your preferred text editor.

```{admonition} Already have a notebook?
:class: tip

If you have an existing `.ipynb` Jupyter notebook that you'd like to contribute, you can convert it to MyST markdown
and then edit the `.md` file to prepare it for contributing.

Run `jupytext your-notebook.ipynb --to myst` to create a new file, `your-notebook.md`. Edit this file to
include the relevant sections from the docs template.
```
## 2. Write your document

Follow the template to write your document. Inside the template you'll also find handy tips for taking screenshots of the viewer,
hiding code cells, using style guides and what to include in the required prerequisites section.

## 3. Update TOC

Add your document to the correct folder based on its content (see the [list above](#0-before-you-start) for common locations), and update `napari/docs/_toc.yml`.

If you're adding a document
to an existing group, simply add a new `- file:` entry in the appropriate spot. For example, if I wanted to add
a `progress_bars.md` how to guide, I would place it in `napari/docs/howtos` and update `_toc.yml` as below:

```yaml
- file: howtos/index
subtrees:
- titlesonly: True
entries:
- file: howtos/layers/index
subtrees:
- titlesonly: True
    entries:
    - file: howtos/layers/image
    - file: howtos/layers/labels
    - file: howtos/layers/points
    - file: howtos/layers/shapes
    - file: howtos/layers/surface
    - file: howtos/layers/tracks
    - file: howtos/layers/vectors
- file: howtos/connecting_events
- file: howtos/napari_imageJ
- file: howtos/docker
- file: howtos/perfmon
- file: howtos/progress_bars # added
```

To create a new subheading, you need a `subtrees` entry. For example, if I wanted to add `geo_tutorial1.md` and `geo_tutorial2.md`
to a new `geosciences` subheading in tutorials, I would place my documents in a new folder `napari/docs/tutorials/geosciences`,
together with an `index.md` that describes what these tutorials would be about, and then update `_toc.yml` as below:

```yaml
- file: tutorials/index
subtrees:
- entries:
    - file: tutorials/annotation/index
    subtrees:
    - entries:
        - file: tutorials/annotation/annotate_points
    - file: tutorials/processing/index
    subtrees:
    - entries:
        - file: tutorials/processing/dask
    - file: tutorials/segmentation/index
    subtrees:
    - entries:
        - file: tutorials/segmentation/annotate_segmentation
    - file: tutorials/tracking/index
    subtrees:
    - entries:
        - file: tutorials/tracking/cell_tracking
    - file: tutorials/geosciences/index                 # added
    subtrees:                                           # added
    - entries:                                          # added
        - file: tutorials/geosciences/geo_tutorial1     # added
        - file: tutorials/geosciences/geo_tutorial2     # added
```

## 4. Preview your document

Once you've added your document to the `docs` folder and updated the `_toc.yml`, you can preview the website
 locally by running `make docs` from the root of
the `napari` repository (assuming you've installed the [docs prerequisites](#prerequisites)).

```bash
make docs
```

The rendered HTML will be placed in `napari/docs/_build`. Find `index.html` in this folder and drag it
into a browser to preview the website with your new document.

Napari continuous integration includes a GitHub action that builds the
documentation and saves the artifact for you to download. This is another way
to check that your built documentation looks as you expect. To download the
built documentation, go to your PR, scroll down to the continuous integration
tests, then:

1. click on 'details' next to 'Build Docs / Build & Upload Artifact (pull_request)'

![doc-continuous-integration-1](images/doc-ci-1.png)

2. click on 'summary' on the top left corner

![doc-continuous-integration-1](images/doc-ci-2.png)

3. scroll down to 'artifacts' and click on 'docs' to download the built documentation

![doc-continuous-integration-1](images/doc-ci-3.png)

## 5. Submit your pull request

Once you have written and previewed your document, it's time to open a pull request to [napari's main repository](https://github.com/napari/napari) and contribute it to our codebase.
If you've never opened a Pull Request, you may find [this guide](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-create-a-pull-request-on-github) useful.
You can also reach out to us on [zulip](https://napari.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/212875-general) for assistance!

Not sure where to place your document or update `_toc.yml`? Make a best guess and open the pull request - the napari team will
help you edit your document and find the right spot!

Commit message:

Specified that the path is to the local folder.

docs/developers/documentation/index.md, after:

(docs_contributing_guide)=
# Contributing Documentation

This guide will teach you how to submit new documents to napari's usage documentation.

## Prerequisites

- Familiarity with `git`
- A [GitHub](https://github.com) account
- A clean conda environment with napari docs dependencies installed
    - You can install these with `pip install "napari[docs]"`
    - These dependencies will allow you to preview your document locally, as it would appear on `napari.org`
    - They will also install `jupytext`, which you will need to contribute documents containing code or viewer interactions

## 0. Before you start

If you'd like to contribute a brand new document to our usage section, it might be worth [opening an issue](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/new?assignees=&labels=documentation&template=documentation.md&title=)
 on our repository first to discuss the content you'd like to see and get some early feedback from the community.
The napari team can also suggest what type of document would be best suited, and whether there are already
existing documents that could be expanded to include the content you think is lacking.

Go to your local napari folder to find examples of documents you might want to contribute. The paths are listed in parentheses below:

- **Explanations** (in `napari/docs/guides`): in depth content about napari architecture, development choices and some complex features
- **Tutorials** (in `napari/docs/tutorials`): detailed, reproducible step by step guides, usually combining multiple napari features to complete a potentially complex task
- **How-tos** (in `napari/docs/howtos/`): simple step by step guides demonstrating the use of common features
- **Getting started** (in `napari/docs/tutorials/fundamentals`): these documents are a mix of tutorials and how-tos covering the fundamentals of installing and working with napari for beginners

```{admonition} Got materials for a workshop?
:class: tip

If you already have teaching materials e.g. recordings, slide decks or jupyter notebooks
hosted somewhere, you can add links to these on our [napari workshops](../../further-resources/napari-workshops.md) page.
```

If you are amending an existing document, make your changes and skip straight
to [Step #4 - Preview your document](#4-preview-your-document).
If you are writing a document whose content is mostly text,
you can write a plain markdown document and skip straight to [Step #3 - Update TOC](#3-update-toc).
If you are writing a how-to guide or tutorial that requires executing code or working with the napari viewer, follow
the steps below to prepare your document.

### Prerequisites for contributing documentation with code

- [Jupyter notebook](https://jupyter.org/) installed
- Familiarity with Jupyter notebooks (code cells and markdown cells)
- Familiarity with using napari through a Jupyter notebook

## 1. Download our template

Our goal is that all tutorials and how-tos are easily downloadable and executable by our users.
This helps ensure that they are reproducible and makes them easier to maintain.
We therefore provide a notebook template for our documents.

[Jupyter notebooks](https://jupyter.org/) are a great option for our documents, because they allow you to easily combine code and well formatted text in markdown.
However, their [raw JSON format](https://numpy.org/numpy-tutorials/content/pairing.html#background) is not great for version control, so we use [MyST Markdown](https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) documents in our repository and on napari.org.

Fork and clone [our repository](https://github.com/napari/napari), and make a copy of `napari/docs/developers/documentation/docs_template.md`.
You can edit the template directly in Jupyter notebook, or in your preferred text editor.

```{admonition} Already have a notebook?
:class: tip

If you have an existing `.ipynb` Jupyter notebook that you'd like to contribute, you can convert it to MyST markdown
and then edit the `.md` file to prepare it for contributing.

Run `jupytext your-notebook.ipynb --to myst` to create a new file, `your-notebook.md`. Edit this file to
include the relevant sections from the docs template.
```
## 2. Write your document

Follow the template to write your document. Inside the template you'll also find handy tips for taking screenshots of the viewer,
hiding code cells, using style guides and what to include in the required prerequisites section.

## 3. Update TOC

Add your document to the correct folder based on its content (see the [list above](#0-before-you-start) for common locations), and update `napari/docs/_toc.yml`.

If you're adding a document
to an existing group, simply add a new `- file:` entry in the appropriate spot. For example, if I wanted to add
a `progress_bars.md` how to guide, I would place it in `napari/docs/howtos` and update `_toc.yml` as below:

```yaml
- file: howtos/index
subtrees:
- titlesonly: True
entries:
- file: howtos/layers/index
subtrees:
- titlesonly: True
    entries:
    - file: howtos/layers/image
    - file: howtos/layers/labels
    - file: howtos/layers/points
    - file: howtos/layers/shapes
    - file: howtos/layers/surface
    - file: howtos/layers/tracks
    - file: howtos/layers/vectors
- file: howtos/connecting_events
- file: howtos/napari_imageJ
- file: howtos/docker
- file: howtos/perfmon
- file: howtos/progress_bars # added
```

To create a new subheading, you need a `subtrees` entry. For example, if I wanted to add `geo_tutorial1.md` and `geo_tutorial2.md`
to a new `geosciences` subheading in tutorials, I would place my documents in a new folder `napari/docs/tutorials/geosciences`,
together with an `index.md` that describes what these tutorials would be about, and then update `_toc.yml` as below:

```yaml
- file: tutorials/index
subtrees:
- entries:
    - file: tutorials/annotation/index
    subtrees:
    - entries:
        - file: tutorials/annotation/annotate_points
    - file: tutorials/processing/index
    subtrees:
    - entries:
        - file: tutorials/processing/dask
    - file: tutorials/segmentation/index
    subtrees:
    - entries:
        - file: tutorials/segmentation/annotate_segmentation
    - file: tutorials/tracking/index
    subtrees:
    - entries:
        - file: tutorials/tracking/cell_tracking
    - file: tutorials/geosciences/index                 # added
    subtrees:                                           # added
    - entries:                                          # added
        - file: tutorials/geosciences/geo_tutorial1     # added
        - file: tutorials/geosciences/geo_tutorial2     # added
```

## 4. Preview your document

Once you've added your document to the `docs` folder and updated the `_toc.yml`, you can preview the website
 locally by running `make docs` from the root of
the `napari` repository (assuming you've installed the [docs prerequisites](#prerequisites)).

```bash
make docs
```

The rendered HTML will be placed in `napari/docs/_build`. Find `index.html` in this folder and drag it
into a browser to preview the website with your new document.

Napari continuous integration includes a GitHub action that builds the
documentation and saves the artifact for you to download. This is another way
to check that your built documentation looks as you expect. To download the
built documentation, go to your PR, scroll down to the continuous integration
tests, then:

1. click on 'details' next to 'Build Docs / Build & Upload Artifact (pull_request)'

![doc-continuous-integration-1](images/doc-ci-1.png)

2. click on 'summary' on the top left corner

![doc-continuous-integration-1](images/doc-ci-2.png)

3. scroll down to 'artifacts' and click on 'docs' to download the built documentation

![doc-continuous-integration-1](images/doc-ci-3.png)

## 5. Submit your pull request

Once you have written and previewed your document, it's time to open a pull request to [napari's main repository](https://github.com/napari/napari) and contribute it to our codebase.
If you've never opened a Pull Request, you may find [this guide](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-create-a-pull-request-on-github) useful.
You can also reach out to us on [zulip](https://napari.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/212875-general) for assistance!

Not sure where to place your document or update `_toc.yml`? Make a best guess and open the pull request - the napari team will
help you edit your document and find the right spot!
